hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
have fled the city of Rafa as Israeli
forces intensify their military
operation there neighboring Egypt has
now told the United States that Israel's
actions in Gaza are jeopardizing
Regional security foreign minister Sam
shukri discussed the need to restart Aid
deliveries to Gaza in a phone call with
Secretary of State Anthony blinkin the
two also discussed the Israeli seizure
of the Palestinian side of the Rafa
border crossing Cairo says the presence
of Israeli troops and tanks violates
2007 treaty Israel's move has
exacerbated simmering tensions between
Egypt and Israel so much so that Egypt
has announced it will formally support a
case brought by South Africa at the
international court of justice accusing
Israel of committing genocidal acts in
Gaza let's bring in journalists Kareem
El gawari in Cairo and balik sadine in
Tel Aviv good to see you both let's
start with you kareim it's Egypt's
decision to join the J case a direct
result of Israel seizing the Rafa
border well what is clear is that the
Egyptian side is very very angry they
asked for weeks Netanyahu not to do an
incursion into Rafa they pleaded to the
Americans to stop this idea now it's
happening since days Israeli operations
in the immediately area of the Egyptian
border and even at the Egyptian border
cross Crossing of Rafa with Israeli
tanks and soldiers stationed there and
famous pictures of Israeli tanks
pointing their barrels towards the
Egyptian s so a lot of Egyptian anger
and basically two answers the first
answer was that the Egyptian s suspended
the security cooperation at the
immediate border area with the Israeli
Army that of course has an effect on the
AIDS coming from the Egyptian side to
the Gaza Strip because that has to be
coordinated between the Israeli Army and
the Egyptian side and the second thing
as you mentioned um that Egypt joined
the case of South Africa at the
international court of justice in the H
um where Israel is accused of genocide
so a lot of Egyptian anger yeah the
second one a more symbolic one what does
this tell us about the state of relation
between Egypt and Israel
current well they are very frosty right
now I I would say I mean the Egyptians
are saying basically that the Israeli
incursion into Rafa violates existing
treaties between the two countries where
there is stated that there should be
some kind of demilitarized zone in the
immediate border area where there are no
heavy Weaponry where's no heavy Weaponry
allowed the Egyptians say this is now
violated and in a way I mean this is of
course don't forget Egypt and uh and
Israel this is the oldest peace treaty
between an Arab country and the Israeli
side came David 1979 and we might come
to the point where this is it at a
disposal so that for Israel after the
foundation of Israel and the 67 War and
the gaining of occupied territories the
Camp David peace treaty is maybe the
biggest achievement of the Israel State
and that might be at the end even at
risk in this whole thing we're seeing
right now B let's hand it over to you so
Egypt is saying that the seizing of the
Rafa Crossing violates security
agreements between Egypt and Israel so
why is Israel so keen on holding the
Rafa
Crossing well if the question is why so
keen on holding the Rafa Crossing it's
obvious that wants to make sure that
there are no smuggling of any weapons
from the sin penia inside Gaza at any
point in the future but Israel after all
doesn't want to hold it forever and this
is the main point here uh a report today
in Israel said that Israeli officials
asked the pa the Palestinian Authority
to take control at least unofficially
for the Rafa and they refuse because
they don't want to um um do it before
the end of the war which means maybe
they don't want to do it before the end
of the war because they don't want Hamas
to attack them and this whole idea of
the Egyptian narrative that they are uh
doing this as a result of the Israeli
operation in Rafa doesn't really align
with the fact that Israel according to
many officials did coordinate with the
Egyptians this um uh uh operation
limited one uh to say uh um for months
now so this is a very weird that the
Egyptians are taking these tips right
now especially after the coordination
well they say they are angered and the
two countries as Kareem pointed out have
a long history of security cooperation
um that is very beneficial for both
countries um how worried are Israeli
officials over the tensions with
Egypt well we can say obviously there's
a lot of frustration between the two
parties right now but I talked to
security officials today they told me
that they see this as a lip service uh
um by the Egyptians because after Israel
um uh entered Rafa Crossing and Israeli
flags with the tanks were uh very close
to Egypt they want to calm the anger
from the Egyptian public that's why they
are now participating in this uh um uh
case against Israel in the ha and then
then um the officials saying that uh
Israel or excuse me Egypt just just
doesn't want Israel to expand the
operation in Rafa because their red line
is obviously the uh gazans to actually
go through the crossing to the Sinai
penena this is the red line for Egypt so
they want to pressure Israel by doing
this not to expand the operation that is
taking place right now in Rafa so kareim
what can Egypt do about all of this
about Israel Crossing its red lines and
you know the presence of Israel troops
on the Rafa border would they risk
suspending the peace treaty with
Israel I mean for them it's to wait and
see when there is a time to they can
exert pressure on the Israeli side
because don't forget Israel needs the
Egyptians as mediators between Israel
Hamas and the US this is the role they
were playing all the last weeks so this
will continue and the second thing is
also that the Israel needs probably
Egyptians for the day after and right
now of course we don't have any idea
what the day after looks like I mean
Netanyahu told us that when he will go
to Rafa there is four Hamas battalions
which we he has to destroy and then the
war will be over now the war is flared
up in the north again in in jabalia so
it's all one big mess and I guess I
guess as long as stays to be such a mess
Egypt will stay out of any kind of
post-war role within the Gaza Street
balik we don't have much time but I do
want to talk about the day after does
the Israeli government believe there is
an end game in Gaza which doesn't
involve heavy Egyptian
participation well this is exactly the
main point of this agreement not only
between Israel and Egypt also between
Israel and the Americans nanahu even
today said it that there will be no
discussion about the day after unless
there is a full disarmament of Hamas and
total Destruction of Hamas in Gaza a lot
of critics critics are saying that Natan
can't take that decision because of the
right-wing hardliners in his cabinet and
in his uh government in general and as I
see it in the current formation of the
Israeli government and Coalition this
can be done there can be uh uh the uh
wishful thinking or the the wish
that Egypt wants which is the PA
controlling all of Gaza so this is the
main point of this agreement for now
kareim and balik thank you so much to
both of you